There's that music again. Come close by the water, little ones — the morning's bright and the kettle of the day is just starting to warm. I want to ask you a small thing before I tell you a story.
Here it is. If you do a good thing — a real, kind, useful thing — and not one single soul is there to see you do it, and nobody ever claps, and nobody even knows it was you... does the good thing still count?
Hold onto that. Some good is loud, and you hear it from across the meadow. But the best good is often the kind you never see done at all — and God sees that kind, even when no one else does. Listen close. The answer's in the story.
Now, this happened on a high blue morning last summer, when the creek ran clear and the whole place looked... tended. Tidy, in the way a garden looks when somebody loves it. And nobody could work out who'd done it.
The high gate by the far path had been hanging loose for a week — and that morning it swung shut, neat as you like. The trough was full to the brim, and not a cloud had rained. And the bramble that snagged every paw and hoof on the bank was gone, cut clean and laid in a tidy pile. Just... done. By nobody anyone saw.
And high in the branches sat Gah-Ring-Goh the parrot, all bright feathers and dramatic flourish — and he had just finished, all by himself, carrying one small twig across the clearing. He called down,
BEHOLD! Friends! Wayfarers! Gather, gather, and witness — for I, Garingo, have moved a TWIG. A heavy twig. A twig of consequence. Did you see it? Tell me you saw it. Somebody must have seen it.
And over hopped Bongo the bear cub, with his usual cheerful crash, landing in the reeds. He blinked up and said,
I saw it! I think. Was it the twig, or the OTHER twig? There's a lot of twigs. But great job, Garingo, that was a really good twig.
THANK you, Bongo. You alone understand greatness. And THIS is the trouble with good deeds, you see — a good deed wants an audience. What is the point of moving a heroic twig if there is no crowd to gasp? A kindness in an empty meadow is a tree falling with nobody to clap.
And Shelly the tortoise, who had not clapped, said from her rock,
The twig's still on the ground, Garingo. You picked it up and put it down again.
But then Garingo looked properly down the bank — and his beak fell open. For the gate was mended. And the trough was full. And the bramble was cleared. All of it good, useful work. And not one creature was there taking a bow.
Wait. WAIT. Somebody fixed the gate — and took NO bow? Somebody filled the trough — and gave NO speech? Somebody cleared the whole bramble — and didn't even leave a small plaque? This is an OUTRAGE. There is good work going UN-APPLAUDED. Not on my watch.
Now, here's the part nobody noticed yet. Down by the Crossway signpost, there was a note that morning, in a careful hand. And Ranger Ray's note that morning read: gate's mended, trough's filled, mind the wet plank on the footbridge.
And Shelly the tortoise — wise old Shelly — read it slowly, the way she reads everything, and she said only one quiet thing, and went back to her sun-warm rock,
The best good's often the kind you never see done. He's been at it longer than any of us. God sees it, even if we don't.
So Garingo set out to catch the mystery good-doer — and throw him the welcome of a lifetime. A parade. A banner. A song with his name in it. First, he hid behind the trough and waited.
I shall lie in WAIT. The moment our shy hero returns to admire his trough, I leap out — trumpets, confetti, the lot. Nobody does good unthanked on MY meadow. Here he comes. Here he... no. That's a duck. Lovely duck. Not him.
Quack. ...Quack, quack. Listen to that — a flawless impression, if anyone were watching, which they are NOT. ...Focus, Garingo. The trough. The hero. Not the waterfowl.
And Zippy the hummingbird darted in, going so fast she was three places at once, and she buzzed,
Okay — okay. I built a TRAP. Soft, friendly, no-ouch capture device, optimal welcome-deployment radius, applause auto-triggers on contact. We catch the hero, we cheer the hero. Foolproof.
Beat two. The friendly no-ouch trap caught a friendly no-ouch breeze, and a leaf, and Bongo. Three times. And still, whoever mended and filled and cleared and tended... came and went, and was never once there when they looked.
I got caught again! ...Was I the hero that time? Did I do it? ...Oh. It's the soft trap again. Hi, trap.
Beat three. I shall simply ASK the signpost. Note-leaver! Show yourself! Accept your parade! ...He's not answering a signpost, Garingo, signposts don't — oh, this is impossible. Who IS this creature who does so much good and won't be caught keeping a scrap of the credit?
And it was old Shelly, from her rock, who told him plainly. It's Ranger Ray, she said. The keeper. He mends the wood, and fills the trough, and leaves the notes, and plants the trees — season after season — and he is never seen, and never thanked, because Garingo... that was never what the good was for.
Now, Garingo went quiet for a long while after that. And then — nobody watching, for once — he flew down to the footbridge, to the wet plank Ray's note had warned about, the one come loose at the end. And he set himself to mending it.
Press the plank. Tuck the moss in the gap. Wedge the little stone under, so. There. ...There. Good as new. Nearly. Mostly.
And he looked up, the way you do when you've done a good thing — to find the face that says well done. And there wasn't one. There was just the water, and the reeds, and Garingo, on a quiet bridge.
Nobody saw that. Nobody clapped. There's no parade for a parrot who fixed a plank.
And the stone slipped. I pressed it and it slipped again. So it didn't even work. Not yet. Maybe not at all.
I did the good. Nobody saw it. And it didn't even work yet. So... does it still count? Or did I just sit on a cold bridge for nothing?
And then, slow and heavy, Old Timber came down the bank — and he didn't tell Garingo a single thing. He just sat beside him on the bridge, and after a while, he asked him one quiet question.
Garingo. Who do you reckon mends that high gate, year after year, when not a soul is watching... and who do you suppose claps for him?
...Ranger Ray. And nobody claps for him. Nobody ever has. He just... keeps doing it. So if it counted for him all this time with no one watching... then it counted just now. Even though nobody saw. The good was real the second I did it.
Mm. And here's the small true thing under all of it: God sees what's done quietly. Ray's good was never lost for going un-clapped. Nor was yours.
Now, that evening, we all sat down by the pond, where the light goes gold, and I asked them — what was the thing, in the end, that made the day turn? And Garingo, who is not usually quiet, spoke up first, and small.
I learned it counts even if nobody saw. I used to think a good deed needed a crowd. But the gate, and the trough, and the trees — all the best good around here got done with nobody watching. It still counted the whole time. It still counts.
And at the edge of the clearing stood Fern the fawn, soft-eyed and a little shy, and she whispered the small thing the rest of us had missed,
Um... and you don't stop, even when it's tiring, and even before you can see it working. Ray didn't stop. That's the hard part. And the kind part.
Then I walked them a little way down the bank, to the berry trees — the ones heavy and bright and feeding half the Creek that summer. And I told them: Ranger Ray planted those. Years back. As tiny seeds, when there was nothing yet to clap for. He didn't plant them to stand and be thanked under them. He just planted, and tended, and let them take their own slow time. And here they are.
And the Bible has a line for exactly that. A man named Paul wrote it, a long, long time ago, in a letter to his friends in a place called Galatia, telling them to keep on doing good and not get tired of it. It's in the Bible, in a book called Galatians, chapter six, verse nine. And it goes,
And let us not be weary in well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.
Which is the grandfather way of saying: keep doing the good, friends, even when you're tired of it, and even before you can see it grow. The good is real the moment you do it. God sees it. And the harvest comes up in its own season — not the day you ask, but the day it's ready.
So here's a small one to carry home: do one quiet good thing this week that nobody will clap for. And then keep doing the good, even before you see it grow. Now — isn't that something. That's how I remember it.
And over by the reeds, Bongo the bear cub, who'd been very quiet, said the truest small thing of all,
I'm gonna go fix something. And not tell anybody. ...Don't watch me!
And from his perch on the lecture branch swooped Professor Hoot, the most certain owl in Shiloh Creek. He cleared his throat — ahem — and announced,
Children, gather round. Today, a fact known to be true beyond any doubt — that means there is no arguing with it — and tied, you'll be glad to hear, to those very berry trees our young friends so admired in the story. Here it is, plainly: a seed does its first real work underground, where no one can see it, long before any green sprout pokes up at all.
First it must germinate — that simply means it wakes up and begins to grow. It drinks a little water, splits its coat, and sends a tiny root downward into the dark to drink and to hold fast. All of that good, hidden work happens before you ever see a single leaf. The waiting, you see, IS the growing.
Which reminds me of the splendid root systems of the oak, which can stretch — Pardon. As I was saying. The seed works first in the dark, unseen. Marvelous. Class dismissed.
And out from the reeds came the Mudpuppy brothers — Splish, Splash, and Splosh — three frogs and one chorus of confusion. Splosh started,
Today on Mudpuppy Minutes, we will explain... who in the WORLD is Ranger Ray!
Easy. Ranger Ray is a kind of weather. When the trough fills up, that's a Ray. You can't catch a Ray. Everybody knows you can't catch weather.
No, no — wait. Isn't Ranger Ray just... a person? Who looks after the whole place? And mends things, and plants the trees, quiet-like?
Oh no — wait — that can't be right, that's FAR too easy. A person? Doing good with nobody watching? Out of the question. Ranger Ray is plainly a very polite mountain.
Wait — is it actually just a kind person who looks after everything?
...Nah.
Mudpuppies, mudpuppies — we have solved it. Ranger Ray is a polite mountain that fills troughs. Case closed!
Now — here's the quiet truth, little ones. Ranger Ray is no mountain and no weather. He's the keeper who tends this whole place, mostly when nobody's looking. That's the real of it. The frogs may keep the mountain.
And the lantern up the path was already lit — the way it always is, before anyone thinks to thank the one who lit it. So that's how I remember it, little ones. Be well, and keep doing the quiet good.
See you next time, somewhere in Shiloh Creek.